---
permalink: 2025/02/07/Help Talk/
layout: post
title: Help! Talk
draft: true
tags: [presentations, code]
---

I have had a new talk selected for the upcoming DDD North 2025 which will be at Hull University on 22nd February. I've included here a rough draft of the talk and will add some photographs later. 

This talk is about how we debug and solve problems, but also about how we, as programmers live inside our own heads a lot of the time, and how we can catch ourselves when we fall into unproductive 
patterns of thought.

## Title

Help! I've fallen and I can't get up!

## Abstract 

We developers spend our lives going from "Everything is terrible" to "I'm awesome!" and back again, often more than once in the same day. Occasionally, we can find ourselves stuck either 
in old, unfamiliar code, with a bug, a broken test, or just general overwhelm of too much to do in too little time. 

Let's talk about strategies to recognize when that is happening, some ways to get unstuck when you don't know where to go or how to get there. 

-------------------------------

## Introduction

Hello everyone, thanks for being here. My name is Derek Graham, here's some of my socials if you would like to get in contact after the talk or grab me at the end - or anytime during DDD.

I have been a developer for a really long time but I'm now in an Architecture role working for a European team within Sage. 

I started thinking about this talk a while ago for several reasons. 

One is I mentor a number of early career developers and often need to talk about problem solving, debugging, all those kinds of things where stuff doesn't go to plan and they don't know where to go next.

I also work with a non-profit in South Africa called "We Think Code" who help people from non-traditional educational backgrounds gain access to training and careers in computing where they would not normally have a chance. I mentor a small team of second-year students who are approaching more challenging projects getting ready to leave the bootcamp world and start an internship at a real company. This is a joy to do but frequently they come up against problems they have no idea how to solve.

The final reason for thinking about this talk is I took up paddle boarding last summer because it looked like good exercise, got you out in the fresh air, and it looked super easy to do. It's a 10ft x 3ft rigid board, a bit like a surf board so there's loads of room to be really secure and balanced. Right? Turns out you can watch all the videos on youtube but until you actually get out on the water, you don't realise that actually you are trying to stand on is water! Water has lumps and bumps in it and you might not realise this until you are far from shore in the middle of a lake and you can't remember how you were supposed to do things. 

Don't worry this talk is more about development and less about my failures in my new sport.
2:32

-------------------------------


## Stuck?

When I say stuck I mean when you are working on some code - using a library, an API, your own code from six months ago, your own code from a few minutes ago - and you can't get it to behave the way you want it to. And so you're not sure where to go next...

By show of hands...
Who here has ever had a problem they didn't know how to solve? Who here has ever felt like you can't make progress because you tried everything and now are out of ideas?

Keep your hands up, look around at all the other terrible developers in the room! 

That's the job isn't it. As a young person I thought I would eventually get so good that I would never get stuck and I would know the answers to all my problems. Turns out that day never came. But that's the job, that's what we get paid for. We solve problems, sure but we spend most of our lives being wrong. Something won't work, it won't work then it does. We don't get a parade for making that tiny bit of progress, we maybe will congratulate ourselves with a cup of coffee, but we move onto the next bit of the problem where we are going to be equally wrong until we aren't any more. But what happens when we don't know how to move on get fix this one piece?

"Always wanted to travel back in time to try fighting a younger version of yourself? Software development is the career for you!" = @Loh

Problem solving is difficult and it takes time. It's ok to get stuck, it's important what we do after we recognize we are stuck.

When you think about it, you spend 80% of your time reading code, 20% writing code and the other 90% debugging that code. I don't think that's a joke. We always seem to budget for how much coding we can do in a cycle but we don't factor in debugging and fixing stuff that is fighting us. We put a lot of emphasis on writing code and trying to make that as efficient as possible, we are formally or informally taught how to work with several kinds of programming language, every kind of framework. 

But no one really gets taught debugging and problem solving particularly well. We are all just supposed to know how to do it naturally or expected to pick it up and be good at it.


6:00

## Assumptions

Feynman "The first principle is that you must not fool yourself - and you are the easiest person to fool" 

Debugging feels hard because we take our code writing skills where we have a degree of certainty (language, algorithms etc) and try to apply those skills into a new context. This context where we don't know what is going on and there is a much higher degree of uncertainty. We need to understand that we don't understand the behaviour. Obvious but it adds stress if we don't acknowledge it. 

Stress comes because we think we should be like these programming gods (peeps on e.g. youtube) who never make a mistake. We feel the need to get this done fast.
Speed is your enemy here. Especially with hard to find bugs. 

Not understanding is normal - and we should acknowledge that. Your internal monologue is screaming at you to speed up when what we most need is to slow down.

We need to shift our focus from progress mode -> investigation mode

Most common strategy:

Change a thing - did it work? Awesome, let's not ask any more questions. 
No it didn't work -> Change something else ? We started with one problem, not we have two or more problems...

This strategy can work if we really understand the code that we are working on - might be fastest - possibly useful
If we don't fully understand, this can lead to infinite loops - while(1) loop

The less we understand, the more likely it is that something we aren't considering is causing the problem. The random change strategy becomes weak!

We need to focus on strategies that help us find the problem - invalid or inaccurate assumptions we are making about this code. Where are we wrong? 
Most of the time, it's our understanding that is wrong rather than the code. Difficult to focus on our understanding when we are looking in the code.

Assumptions are hard for us to detect - these are the things we are taking for granted by definition. 

That thing has to be there by this point. Have we checked? No, then slow down and check that it actually is there. Is it the truth or is it an assumption?

Stop and create a list of assumptions and ways in which you could test those assumptions. 

We can use a number of ways to check your assumptions
- automated tests
- manual runs
- debugger breakpoints
- printing values to console
- logs
- changing small things (psychic debugging - make a change predict how it will affect the program, see if it does break in that way)

Bugs hide in the stuff we are not checking. What is the truth and what is our perspective. Reconsider the perspective.

Make a hypothesis
Design an experiment. Can be in your mind or in the actual application. 
Scientific method - what would disprove this?
If this was true, what should that look like?

Write stuff down - what you have done, what you think you should check - doesn't need to be super complex and can be added to as you go along - helps if you think of something else while you are setting up another check. Seems tedious until nothing is still working and we can go back and review what we have done and what must be left. Stops us going around in circles. Keep it to one side so you can add to it but it keeps your mind clear for what you are currently investigating but you can add to it as things occur to you.

Draw diagrams - Notes stop you from repeating yourself. E.g. Excel integration with an application. There were lots of bad names in the existing application code - ExcelReportManager, ReportingGeneralManager, ReportingExcelDocument. Easy to get lost, notes and diagrams help you to keep track of where you are. 

Learn some UML - draw a diagram of what is happening or the links between bits of code as you work out what is happening and your understaning grows. 

## Physical Assumptions 

We see spelling mistakes or mistyped paths or names all the time. If you know a file is definitely being used but there is something failing - check that the file - as stated - actually does exist and there isn't a typo in the code, or the file has been mis-named. Misspell the file name yourself and prove that that throws an exception.

Check file names, method names, If you say it's definitely got to load the DLL from disk and you know the DLL is there - make sure it's spelled correctly
and it's in the right place, and it's the right version. Use tooling to help with these things. Is there a space, are letters in the wrong order? Tools can help here - e.g. to check that the correct DLL exists in the correct place and is being loaded correctly

Had an issue with a piece of code a while ago where weird things were happening in the application, we looked everywhere. One candidate was the query that was being executed. A two minute review of that showed that that looked ok. We looked everywhere else over a period of about a week. We kept coming back to the data being returned was wrong even though the data in the database was correct. It was only when we stopped to consider that maybe the query was wrong that we found the problem. This was a linq to SQL query and when we took it apart - running parts separately, commenting bits out etc. we discovered a tiny bit of punctuation was wrong and entirely changed the sense of the query and made it obvious why the data looked the way it did in the application. 1 week to find 1 character!!

Other instances we have found where someone has copied and pasted text from MS Word into the code and copied some weird non-printing characters that messed up the code but didn't show up in the editor or in any diffs. We had to switch editor (to Np++) and switched on non-printing characters to find that one.

---------------------------------

Let's talk about some things you can do. First, because we work with electrons and pixels rather than molecules, we do a lot of our work in our heads, so we'll talk about some more abstract, general ideas then move to some more specific concrete ideas.

## 1. Get it out of your head

One of the best ways to immediately find the solution to a problem is to externalise it. Some people find it useful to write a summary of the problem in text - write an email, post something on stack overflow, write a blog post, create a github issue, and increasingly to talk to chatgpt or copilot?

The idea being if you can write a clear summary of the problem you have, rather than it just going round and round in your brain, then you can often solve your own problem before you post the message, hit send or whatever. 

This might work for you, but I don't find it very effective in practice.

The reason for this is that it's too easy for your brain to skip over words, assume other bits of the problem and generally take shortcuts. Much more effective is talking out loud.

## Ducks & Rabbits & Yaks

## Ducks

I learned this practice from the Pragmatic Programmers book many years ago, and it's called a Rubber Duck. You take a rubber duck, a toy, a pet, a real person and get them to sit and listen while you explain out loud what your problem is. 

Explain the problem, and talk about what is actually happening not what you think is happening. Again you can find that you can solve your own problem before you get done explaining to your duck. 

The reason it can be a rubber duck or a pet or a person with no knowledge of your problem is that there is a bit of magic that happens when you are forced to put your problem into actual words and speak them out loud. 

Who has had this experience? You are writing an essay for school, an email, a letter and you print it, send it and then discover you have made a spelling mistake or missed out a word (or several) in the middle of a sentence or used the wrong word entirely?

Reading in your head lets you skip over lots of errors and shortcut what you really mean in a way that speaking aloud - as if you were an actor reading from a script - does not. The act of speaking aloud and actually listening to yourself too - seems to make a big difference in how your brain interprets the information. Almost like you are listening to another person.

There were some discoveries made a while ago in brain surgery that speak to this phenonmenon. They discovered that people with epilepsy could be helped by severing parts of the brain where the right and left hand sides talked to each other. This lead to the weird side effect that you could close one eye, look at an object and know what it was but not what it was called. Covering the other eye, meant that you could look at that same object and know what it was called but not what it was. But - speaking aloud made it possible for both "halves" of the brain to get enough information and the person was able to say what the item was and what it was called. 

This could also be pairing with someone.

## Rabits and Yaks

Weird question and not the setup for a joke. 
Can you tell the difference between a Rabbit and a Yak in your work? Specifically can you tell the difference between Shaving a Yak and going down a rabbit hole? 

## Yak

Yak Shaving is the sort of unavoidable side quest that happens when you are trying to accomplish a reasonable task. Like in video games where you need to kill the dragon but you have no armour, so you have to find the blacksmith but he can't make armour until he lights the fire and he has no matches, on and on until you find yourself in the middle of a field shaving a yak and you have no idea how you got there or why. 

## Rabbit holes

On the other hand, an insidious trap is the rabbit hole. To take a random example, you can't remember the range for a 32 bit unsigned integer so you go to wikipedia and before you know it you are following links and end up reading about early 80s midi synthesizers. This is not something I did last week.

But it is important to know when you are doing a side quest in service of a more important accomplishment and when you are falling down a rabbit hole. 

-------------------------------

Now let's look at some concrete ways we make working on a problem easier.

## Isolation 

Think about recent history and try to isolate where the problem might be.

What have you added or changed recently?
... that you are least confident about?
... that can't possibly be the problem?
... where the most "magic" is happening?
... Where I am making the most assumptions? (this may not be easy)

## Search It

You can use a binary search method, or algorithm really, in lots of different contexts and we'll talk about a few. Rather than checking every single thing, we can shorten the time to find a problem by establishing a start (where things are good) and an end (where things are not good) and picking something roughly in the middle. We check the middle position and see if the problem exists. If it does we move half way towards the start and check again. If everything is fine, we move halfway towards the end and check again.

## Git Bisect 

Git has a command to let you try this with commits. You give it the last known good commit, first bad commit. Will take a commit somewhere in the middle and you check that and report either good or bad. It uses the response to check the next commit half-way between either end, narrowing the possibilities down until the exact commit where the problem first appeared.

Gets to problem quicker than checking each commit in turn.

## Make it Smaller

Often a problem appears to be unapproachable because it seems so vast. Make the problem smaller by getting rid of unnecessary elements. Even if you think it's as small as can be, I guarantee it's not as small as you can make it. Make it smaller still. No, smaller. 

## Delete It

Physically delete code - it's in source control you can get it back.
Delete or comment out code (and maybe replace it with hard coded data or objects) until you find the problem. 

## Extract It

Large scary function? 
Extract some code into a separate method - give it a useful name 
Maybe write a test for your new method. Is the problem in the moved code ?
or is it still in the old code?
Continue doing that until the scary function is not as scary or you fix the problem.

## Console It

Copy the smallest problematic section of code into a console program and just run the code surrounded with hard-coded data. A few times junior devs have tried to run the whole application to setup one test over and over again where moving the specific code out into a tiny test environment gives much faster feedback. 

## (Micro) Test It

Write some microtests for the piece of code and exercise it in a few ways. 

Test are great for attacking a problem from a different angle. Often code in an application can work accidentally by being called in only one way and with settings in a specific order where a test can unintentionally mix things up and is more free to explore different configurations and options available to you.

Tests give you a tight feedback loop to be able to quickly evaluate what is working and what is not, and what used to work and suddenly breaks as you add more to it. 

Make sure to write failing tests by varying data to a passing test so that you know the test isn't passing accidentally. 

Are you able to write tests for most pieces but maybe one piece is resisting testing? That may be where the problem lies, it may be using data or functionaliy - perhaps from elsewhere in the program - you don't yet understand. Global data, external files? Clock? Network? Database?

If the code can't be pulled out, use ASSERT statements as pre- and post-conditions in the code to check for things that absolutely have to be true - but you haven't checked. 

## Integration tests

If the code is resisting unit testing in general, maybe you can you write an integration test for the whole of the problem area? Again Binary Search algorithm - if it fails. Move to the next level down, can you split the integration test into two parts. Test both sides which side fails, begin to work that out. 

## Print it Log it

Depending on your deployment you can go totally old school and use print statements and logging (temporarily) to trace your path through the code, maybe include some variable values, if you have conditionals in your code, if there isn't an else clause, add one and add some logging there to show if you are accidentally skipping over an if that you definitely think it should be hitting. 


## Spike

If you are using a new technology. Write a spike solution - a piece of code that you can use to learn and gain understanding but you will throw away. Do the simplest possible thing. Call one function, Get back one piece of data. Start with the smallest thing. Write a test for it if you can. 
Make a walking skeleton which can be a console app that loads the library, 
pushes some hard-coded data into it and gets something you can print out on the screen. Work on the piece that scares you the most, or that you know the least about.

## Start Somewhere

Code.New();
For new sections of code. 

Start with the smallest piece you can get working, even if it seems trivially easy or something that you won't use in the finished code. Make something actually exist then work to make it better.

A concept that seems simple but was revolutionary for my thinking. Annie Lamott wrote a book a long time ago about writing called "Bird by Bird". One of the ideas in that book she proposes to get around the problem of not knowing where to start or feeling like you can't start until you have everything in place and "perfect" knowledge. It's called the "Shitty first draft" -  can be useful if you are writing and don't know where to start, give yourself permission to make the worse possible version of that thing. Once that's out of the way and actually exists, you then have a million ways in which to improve it.

## Imagine It

A while ago our team was givent the almost impossible task of building an extensibility mechanism that meant that anyone could build addons for our web application to run in the browser, working with our Javascript forms, work with our API and all be secure from attack by outside naughty people. This seemed like a huge mountain of a task for us and some of the senior devs where rightly overwhelmed by this. What helped us to move forward with it - even when we didn't know how we were going to do it or even if it was possible - was to imagine if everything else was solved, how could we just do one thing. How could we just get a new control to show up on one form? Once we'd done this successfullly, we got feedback on what worked and what wouldn't work and began to imagine what the next chunk could look like. We went from a non-existent solution to a fully-working system in about a week.


## Distract Yourself

Coming back to the writer Annie Lamott, she said this. - reboot quote.

Most of the time, we feel that we have to power through, just spend one more hour, one more day on this problem. If only we can keep going, even though it's midnight and we aren't making any progress at all in the last few hours... 

"Almost everything will work again if you unplug it for a few minutes ... including you." - Annie Lamott

Walk away - Go home, do something else and come home the next day.
Relax
Take a show
Nap (working from home)
Physical exercise - executive function, lifts mood
Play a game
Read a book
Move onto another problem - mechanical 

Allow yourself time to process in the background. Staying at work and slogging through feels like the responsible, hard-working thing to do but we don't appreciate when we are tired our executive function drops dramatically and something you might work on all night, can come to you in 5 minutes after a good night's sleep. 

When you come back, you have had a change to incubate the problem, can come back to it with a fresh perspective or even need to relearn something about it.

The psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi wrote a book called "Creativity" in which he talks about this idea of incubation. 

"Ideas churn around below the threshold of consciousness ... it is during this time that unusual connections are likely to be made"

## Caution!!! 
Don't wake up in the night with the "solution" the number of times I have done this, and either forgotten in the morning or written it down and it's entire gibberish - don't trust that. 


## Ready for next time

Remember getting stuck is part of your job in working out problems. So problems won't go away and we will continue to get stuck. What can we do in the longer term to make it easier on ourselves?

Learn some new ways of solving problems

Pair with someone new - working with someone else can give you new ideas about how to approach problems and how they think about things.
Read someone elses code - github for similar applications or problem domains is a good place to start
Learn a new language - PP Languages are focussed on a specific set of problems to solve. Learning new can expand you way of approaching problems even if they are not directly applicable to the framework or language you are using today. 

A Final thought before questions...

## But Won't Generative AI Fix All This?

Github copilots chat gpt will fix it surely?  No, I think this will make it worse, I think we are going to need these skills more. Remember how awful it feels to be looking at a piece of code with a bug in it somewhere, its code that someone else wrote and they left the business years ago so you can't ask them about it and they left no, or wrong, documentation? That's exactly what you get as soon as you copy and paste code written by an AI and commit it. You can't sensibly ask the AI for it's reasoning, why it wrote it that way. Well you can but you probably won't get a good or accurate answer. Beware of becoming the maintenance programmer for your generative AI overlord.


# References

- Pragmatic Programmers - 2nd Edition - Dave Thomas and Andy Hunt
- Brain Rules - John Medina
- Pragmatic Thinking and Learning - Andy Hunt

# Questions



